added post about akka migration to typed actors (#16)
lunatech-labs/lunatech-blog: posts/2020-11-27-typing-your-actors.adoc

= Typing your actors
pedrolunatech
v1.0, 2020-11-27
:title: Typing your actors step by step
:tags: [akka, migration, akka-typed]

== Background

After some frustration with our project's choice for planning poker solution, I did what any reasonable developer would do. No, I didn't search for a more suitable solution, I decided to write mine and do a blog post about it.

The main idea to build a simple application that uses some features of the following core Akka libraries:

* https://doc.akka.io/docs/akka-http/current/index.html[Akka HTTP]:  REST API for Vue.js frontend
* https://doc.akka.io/docs/akka/current/stream/index.html[Akka Streams]: Websocket bi-directional data handling
* https://doc.akka.io/docs/akka/current/typed/index.html[Akka Actors]: Rooms management

Initially, I deliberately chose to use a classic actor implementation so that I could actually also talk about something that might be more useful: migrating an Akka Classic application to an Akka Typed version.

> Why would you want to do that, well for me it is the type safety of not having everything being a function of `Any => Unit` **_and_** strong support to avoid anti-patterns (more eloquently explained https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=vF_-28I6yGE[here]), but feel free to search more if this migration is something for your project.

Reviewer: This change is a mix between what was there and what I proposed. The bit before the comma is a question, which isn't obvious when you look at it.

Author: Yeap, fixing it

= Typing your actors

> Pedro Ferreira <pedro.ferreira@lunatech.nl>

Reviewer 2: This should be pedrolunatech and not Pedro Ferreira <pedro.ferreira@lunatech.nl> . This is what I was trying to say last week @eloots .

v1.0, 2020-11-27
:title: Typing your actors step by step
:tags: [akka, migration, akka-typed]

== Background

> After some frustration with our project's choice for planning poker solution, I did what any reasonable developer would do. No, I didn't search for a more suitable solution, I decided to write mine and do a blog post about it.

Reviewer 3: I'm not sure why some of these were marked as completed... this is grammatically still incorrect.

> After some frustration with our project's choice for planning poker solution, I did what any reasonable developer would do. No, I didn't search for a more suitable solution, I decided to write mine and do a blog post about it.

Author: Fixed

> The main idea is having a simple application that involves a bit of the three core Akka libraries:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The main idea is to build a simple application that uses some features of the following core Akka libraries:
```

> * Http: REST api for Vue.js frontend

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
* Http: REST api for a Vue.js frontend
```

> * Http: REST api for a Vue.js frontend

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* https://doc.akka.io/docs/akka-http/current/index.html[Akka HTTP]: REST API for a Vue.js frontend
```

> * Streams: Websocket bi-directional data handling
> * Actors: Rooms management

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* https://doc.akka.io/docs/akka/current/stream/index.html[Akka Streams]: Websocket bi-directional data handling
* https://doc.akka.io/docs/akka/current/typed/index.html[Akka Actors]: Rooms management
```

> Initially I chose to use an untyped actor system intentionally, so we can actually talk about something that might be more useful, migrating your old Akka applications to a typed actor system. Why would you want to do that, well for me it is the type safety of not having everything being a function of `Any => Unit` and strong support to avoid anti-patterns (more eloquently explained https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=vF_-28I6yGE[here]), but feel free to search more if this migration is something for your project.

Reviewer 4: Why would you want to do that? Well....

> Initially I chose to use an untyped actor system intentionally, so we can actually talk about something that might be more useful, migrating your old Akka applications to a typed actor system. Why would you want to do that, well for me it is the type safety of not having everything being a function of `Any => Unit` and strong support to avoid anti-patterns (more eloquently explained https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=vF_-28I6yGE[here]), but feel free to search more if this migration is something for your project.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Initially, I deliberatly chose to use a classic actor implementation so that I could actually also talk about something that might be more useful: migrating an Akka Classic application to an Akka Typed version.

"Why would you want to do that?", you may ask... Well, for me it is the type safety of Akka Typed which means that an Actor's behaviour isn't just a function of `Any => Unit` **_and_** strong support to avoid certain anti-patterns (more eloquently explained https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=vF_-28I6yGE[here]), but feel free to search more if this migration is something for your project.
```

== Overview

Observable behaviour should stay the same after migration, which consists of:

* A stream for each websocket connection with its own wire data https://github.com/lunatech-labs/lunatech-pointingpoker/blob/master/src/main/scala/com/lunatech/pointingpoker/websocket/WSMessage.scala#L10[domain] forwarding all incoming data to the main application controller (Room Manager) as well as providing an interface to forward outgoing data.

> * Room manager is responsible for translating from wire domain to the application https://github.com/lunatech-labs/lunatech-pointingpoker/blob/master/src/main/scala/com/lunatech/pointingpoker/Room.scala#L74-L84[domain] and https://github.com/lunatech-labs/lunatech-pointingpoker/blob/master/src/main/scala/com/lunatech/pointingpoker/RoomManager.scala#L56-L69[route] translated messages to appropriate rooms and manage each room lifecycle.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
* The Room manager is responsible for translating from wire domain to the application https://github.com/lunatech-labs/lunatech-pointingpoker/blob/master/src/main/scala/com/lunatech/pointingpoker/Room.scala#L74-L84[domain] and https://github.com/lunatech-labs/lunatech-pointingpoker/blob/master/src/main/scala/com/lunatech/pointingpoker/RoomManager.scala#L56-L69[route] translated messages to the appropriate rooms and manage each room lifecycle.
```

> Observable behaviour should stay the same after migration, which consists of:
> 
> * A stream for each websocket connection with its own wire data https://github.com/lunatech-labs/lunatech-pointingpoker/blob/master/src/main/scala/com/lunatech/pointingpoker/websocket/WSMessage.scala#L10[domain] forwarding all incoming data to the main application controller (Room Manager) as well as providing an interface to forward outgoing data.
> * The Room manager is responsible for translating from wire domain to the application https://github.com/lunatech-labs/lunatech-pointingpoker/blob/master/src/main/scala/com/lunatech/pointingpoker/Room.scala#L74-L84[domain] and https://github.com/lunatech-labs/lunatech-pointingpoker/blob/master/src/main/scala/com/lunatech/pointingpoker/RoomManager.scala#L56-L69[route] translated messages to the appropriate rooms and manage each room lifecycle.
> * Rooms are representations of each planning poker session, holding all necessary https://github.com/lunatech-labs/lunatech-pointingpoker/blob/master/src/main/scala/com/lunatech/pointingpoker/Room.scala#L13-L15[information] and making sure that each participant is up to date with it.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Obviously, the observable behaviour should stay the same after migration, which consists of:

* a stream for each websocket connection with its own wire data https://github.com/lunatech-labs/lunatech-pointingpoker/blob/master/src/main/scala/com/lunatech/pointingpoker/websocket/WSMessage.scala#L10[domain] forwarding all incoming data to the main application controller (Room Manager) as well as providing an interface to forward outgoing data;
* the Room manager is responsible for translating from the wire domain to the application https://github.com/lunatech-labs/lunatech-pointingpoker/blob/master/src/main/scala/com/lunatech/pointingpoker/Room.scala#L74-L84[domain] and https://github.com/lunatech-labs/lunatech-pointingpoker/blob/master/src/main/scala/com/lunatech/pointingpoker/RoomManager.scala#L56-L69[route] translated messages to the appropriate rooms and manage each room lifecycle;
* rooms are representations of each planning poker session, holding all necessary https://github.com/lunatech-labs/lunatech-pointingpoker/blob/master/src/main/scala/com/lunatech/pointingpoker/Room.scala#L13-L15[information] and making sure that each participant is up to date with it.
```

== Step by step

First things first, we need to replace our old classical actor system with its typed counterpart:
[source,scala]

> ----

Reviewer 3: I have no idea if this will work or not with asciidoc code blocks, but I know if you have "github flavor" markdown you can actually put the old code and a new code together and then do "```diff" as the language and then use `+` and `-` where you add or remove stuff. If that does work with asciidoc, it may be a cool way to show what you're changing, if not just ignore this.

implicit val system: ActorSystem[SpawnProtocol.Command] =
    ActorSystem(Behaviors.setup[SpawnProtocol.Command](_ => SpawnProtocol()), "pointing-poker")
----

> Takeaways:

Reviewer: I would suggest turning the takeaways and tips in level 3 headers. Looks better IMO.
```suggestion
=== Takeaways
```

* There is no default guardian actor, you need to provide one.

> Tips:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
=== Tips
```

> * Use https://doc.akka.io/api/akka/current/akka/actor/typed/SpawnProtocol$.html[SpawnProtocol], it allows to easily create new actors.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
* Use https://doc.akka.io/api/akka/current/akka/actor/typed/SpawnProtocol$.html[SpawnProtocol], it allows you to easily create new actors.
```

> Now that we have our actor system we need to create our top level actors:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Now that we have our actor system, we need to create our top level actors:
```

[source,scala]
----
system ! SpawnProtocol.Spawn(RoomManager(), "room-manager", Props.empty, system.ignoreRef)
----

> Takeaways:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
=== Takeaways
```

* There is no `actorOf` method on a typed ActorSystem.
* If you don't care/need the response, you can use `system.ignoreRef`

> I could have created the RoomManager during the `Behaviors.setup` when creating the actor system, but I also need the RoomManager reference in my http api, so I created it from “outside” using the `SpawnProtocol.Spawn` which will reply with the ActorRef once created. However as you can see, I’m ignoring the ref for now, because to actually use it, we need to talk how to _ask_ information out of the actor system:

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
I could have created the RoomManager during the `Behaviors.setup` when creating the actor system, but I also need the RoomManager reference in my http api, so I created it from the “outside” using the `SpawnProtocol.Spawn` which will reply with the ActorRef once created. However as you can see, I’m ignoring the ref for now, because to actually use it, we need to talk how to _ask_ information out of the actor system:
```

Reviewer 3: Also the last sentence is it missing the word first? or am I misunderstanding it?
```suggestion
I could have created the RoomManager during the `Behaviors.setup` when creating the actor system, but I also need the RoomManager reference in my http api, so I created it from “outside” using the `SpawnProtocol.Spawn` which will reply with the ActorRef once created. However as you can see, I’m ignoring the ref for now, because to actually use it, we need to first talk about how to _ask_ information from the actor system:
```

Reviewer: **_http api_** should be all uppercase: **_HTTP API_**

[source,scala]
----
implicit val timeout: Timeout = 3.seconds

  val roomManagerFuture: Future[ActorRef[RoomManager.Command]] = system.ask { ref =>
    SpawnProtocol.Spawn(RoomManager(), "room-manager", Props.empty, ref)
  }
  implicit val ec: ExecutionContextExecutor = system.executionContext

  roomManagerFuture.onComplete {
    case Success(roomManager) =>
      val api = API(roomManager, apiConfig)
      api.run()
    case Failure(exception) =>
      log.error("Error creating room manager {}", exception)
  }
----

> Takeaways:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
=== Takeaways
```

* Ask now provides a reference that can receive messages from any actor.

> Now we need to convert RoomManager and Room to typed versions, that could be accomplished either by extending `AbstractBehavior` (object oriented style) or defining functions that return a `Behavior` (functional style), I’ll be using functional style (https://doc.akka.io/docs/akka/current/typed/style-guide.html#functional-versus-object-oriented-style[comparison]):

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Now we need to convert RoomManager and Room to the typed versions, which can be accomplished by either extending `AbstractBehavior` (object oriented style) or defining functions that return a `Behavior` (functional style). I’ll be using the functional style (https://doc.akka.io/docs/akka/current/typed/style-guide.html#functional-versus-object-oriented-style[comparison]):
```

          val newUsers = data.users.map(_.copy(voted = false, estimation = ""))
          broadcast(
            WSMessage(MessageType.Clear, roomId, userId, WSMessage.NoExtra),
            newUsers,
            context
          )
          receiveBehaviour(roomId, data.copy(users = newUsers))
        case ShowVotes(userId) =>
          broadcast(
            WSMessage(MessageType.Show, roomId, userId, WSMessage.NoExtra),
            data.users,
            context
          )
          Behaviors.same
        case Leave(userId) =>
          val newUsers = data.users.filter(_.id != userId)
          broadcast(
            WSMessage(MessageType.Leave, roomId, userId, WSMessage.NoExtra),
            newUsers,
            context
          )
          if (newUsers.isEmpty) {
            Behaviors.stopped
          } else {
            Behaviors.same
          }
        case EditIssue(userId, issue) =>
          broadcast(WSMessage(MessageType.EditIssue, roomId, userId, issue), data.users, context)
          receiveBehaviour(
            roomId,
            data.copy(currentIssue = issue, issueLastEditBy = Option(userId))
          )
      }

    }
----

> Takeaways:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
=== Takeaways
```

* Internal state is now immutable.

> * Sender reference is not present, causing modification on CreateRoom.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
* The Sender reference is not present, causing modification on CreateRoom.
```

> * Sender reference is not present, causing modification on CreateRoom.

Reviewer: In addition to what @ckipp01 suggests, I would be more explicit in saying that as `sender()` is no longer available, the `ActorRef` to the sender of the message, is passed as part of the incoming message.

> * Already used actor DSL, however now compiler also checks (found a missing extends on EditIssue on Room).

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
* Already used actor DSL, however now the compiler also checks (found a missing extends on EditIssue on Room).
```

> * Compiler warns if a message defined in the Actor's protocol is not being handled.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* The compiler will issue a warning if a message defined in the Actor's protocol is not being handled.
```

* Lifecycle messages are handled in a separate function.
* `Context.stop` will only work on child actors.

> Tip:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
=== Tip
```

* Think of your actor as a finite state machine.

Now that the actors are typed, the remaining parts of the system need to be adapted to interact with them.

> Since Akka Http 10.2.x, it is not necessary to convert to untyped actor system to start your HTTP server.  Now it looks like:

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Since Akka Http 10.2.x, it is not necessary to convert to an untyped actor system to start your HTTP server.  Now it looks like:
```

> Since Akka Http 10.2.x, it is not necessary to convert to an untyped actor system to start your HTTP server.  Now it looks like:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Since Akka HTTP 10.2.x, it is not necessary to convert to an untyped actor system to start your HTTP server.  Now it looks like:
```

[source,scala]
----
Http().newServerAt(apiConfig.host, apiConfig.port).bind(route)
----

> Takeaways:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
=== Takeaways
```

> * Before 10.2.x you would need to change to untyped system.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
* Before 10.2.x you would need to change to an untyped system.
```

As for the websocket stream, sadly I couldn’t find anything that would make the integration between streams and typed actors. So instead of changing the whole websocket stream code, I decided to use the coexistence functionalities, which allows me to do:

[source,scala]
----
import akka.actor.typed.scaladsl.adapter._

handleWebSocketMessages(
          WS.handler(
            roomId,
            URLDecoder.decode(encodedName, StandardCharsets.UTF_8.name()),
            roomManager.toClassic
          )
        )
----

Takeaways:

> * You are not bound to use only typed actors, both can coexist.

Reviewer 3: Cool to show that both can exist 👍🏼

      roomProbe.expectMessage(Room.ClearVotes(userId))
    }
----

RoomSpec:

[source,scala]
----
"Room Actor" should {
    "update current issue and broadcast it" in {
      val issue               = "Issue test 1"
      val (user, userProbe)   = createUser(UUID.randomUUID(), "user1", false, "")
      val (user2, user2Probe) = createUser(UUID.randomUUID(), "user2", false, "")
      val dataProbe           = testKit.createTestProbe[Room.Response]()
      val actingUserId        = UUID.randomUUID()
      val (roomId, roomRef) = createRoom(
        UUID.randomUUID(),
        RoomData.empty.copy(users = List(user, user2))
      )

      val expectedMessage = WSMessage(MessageType.EditIssue, roomId, actingUserId, issue)
      val expectedData = Room.DataStatus(data =
        RoomData(
          users = List(user, user2),
          currentIssue = issue,
          issueLastEditBy = Option(actingUserId)
        )
      )

      roomRef ! Room.EditIssue(actingUserId, issue)

      roomRef ! Room.GetData(dataProbe.ref)

      userProbe.expectMsg(expectedMessage)
      user2Probe.expectMsg(expectedMessage)

      dataProbe.expectMessage(expectedData)
    }
  }
----

> Takeaways:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
=== Takeaways
```

> * Since actors are `Behavior` functions overriding internal functions for testing is not suggested like in https://doc.akka.io/docs/akka/current/testing.html#overriding-behavior[classical].

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* Since actors are `Behavior` functions, overriding internal functions for testing is not suggested like in https://doc.akka.io/docs/akka/current/testing.html#overriding-behavior[classical].
```

* `BehaviorTestKit` is better at dealing with an actor's children.
* `ActorTestKit` provides a simple way to create and use probes.
* There isn't a clear way to test communication between more than 2 actors (if they aren't related).

> Tips:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
=== Tips
```

* Normally I would only expose the initial behavior from my actor, but I changed the other behavior access to private on the package, so now I can set the behavior data as I need before the test.
[source,scala]
----
private[actors] def receiveBehaviour(roomId: UUID, data: RoomData): Behavior[Command] = ???
----
* Include a message that allow to inspect internal state, again access is private on package.
[source,scala]
----
  private[actors] final case class GetData(replyTo: ActorRef[Response]) extends Command

  sealed trait Response
  final case class DataStatus(data: RoomData) extends Response
----

== Closing thoughts

> The migration went smoother than I was expecting. Once I started it I couldn't run the application until it was complete, and after changing the whole engine of the app I only faced two compilation errors that were quickly solved and the application was running again. Those errors were actually already present at in the application before the migration, however they went un-noticed due to not having the checks that typed actors bring, so the migration already proved useful.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
The migration went smoother than I was expecting. Once I started it I couldn't run the application until it was complete, and after changing the whole engine of the app I only faced two compilation errors that were quickly solved and the application was running again. Those errors were actually already present at in the application before the migration, however they went unnoticed due to not having the checks that typed actors bring, so the migration already proved useful.
```

> Some of the smoothness while migrating might be caused by already following good practices when using actors, specifically having a DSL already defined. If you're having more troubles when migrating, I would suggest to take a step back and refine your actors' DSL and transitions (How they communicate with each and states that they pass on their lifecycle).

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Some of the smoothness while migrating might be caused by already following good practices when using actors, specifically having a DSL already defined. If you're having more trouble when migrating, I would suggest to take a step back and refine your actors' DSL and transitions (How they communicate with each and states that they pass on their lifecycle).
```

> Some of the smoothness while migrating might be caused by already following good practices when using actors, specifically having a DSL already defined. If you're having more troubles when migrating, I would suggest to take a step back and refine your actors' DSL and transitions (How they communicate with each and states that they pass on their lifecycle).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Some of the smoothness I experienced while migrating might be explained by the fact that I already followed good practices when using classic actors, specifically having a DSL already defined. If you're having more troubles when migrating, I would suggest to take a step back and refine your actors' DSL and transitions (How they communicate with each and states that they pass on their lifecycle).
```

> If you want to see more what could be done with typed actors and scala 3.0, https://blog.lunatech.com/2020/02/using-dotty-union-types-with-akka-typed/[here] is another blog it might interest you.

Reviewer: Due to changes in the blog website, the link was broken. I've added a second article as the blog post was in two parts.
```suggestion
If you want to see more what could be done with typed actors and Scala 3.0, these two blog posts may be interesting to read: https://blog.lunatech.com/posts/2020-02-12-using-dotty-union-types-with-akka-typed[Using Scala 3 Union types with Akka Typed - part 1] and https://blog.lunatech.com/posts/2020-02-19-using-dotty-union-types-with-akka-typed-part-II[Using Scala 3 Union types with Akka Typed - part 2].
```
